Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
talking about Lee Harvey Oswald, the man
who assassinated an American president.
He was a former marine who defected to
the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
A strange man with a complicated past
who, to this day, is still the source
of conspiracy theories about what
actually happened on that day in 1963.
In this episode we’ll take a look at the
early life of Lee Harvey Oswald, the type
of man he was, his time in the Soviet
Union and, of course, the event he was
most famous for, the assassination of JFK.
As you will no doubt know, there
are plenty of conspiracy theories
about whether it was actually
Oswald who killed him, too many to
go into in this episode in fact.
So, we’ll have a follow-up episode where
we are going to look at all of these
theories, and I’ll leave you to decide
whether there’s any truth to them.
OK, let's get into it and
talk about Lee Harvey Oswald.
It was a sunny November afternoon in 1963.
The city of Dallas was in a
jubilant mood because the young,
charismatic and handsome President
of the United States was in town.
In Dealey Plaza, a park in downtown
Dallas, crowds were gathering, excited
for the arrival of the 46-year-old John F.
Kennedy.
Dealey Plaza is a flat,
open area filled with trees.
There’s a bridge heading to the
motorway on one side, and on the other,
several buildings overlooking the park.
Throughout the morning, people
lined the street, and sat
waiting on the grassy banks.
Finally, at 12:30pm the President’s
convertible limousine turned
into Dealey Plaza and a buzz of
excitement washed over the park.
The limo slowed, and Kennedy smiled and
waved to the crowds, his wife and popular
First Lady, Jackie, sat beside him.
Also in the car were the Governor of
Texas, John Connolly, and his wife Nellie.
As they rounded the corner
into the park, Nellie Connally
turned to Kennedy and said: "Mr.
President, you can't say
Dallas doesn't love you.”
It's believed that Kennedy replied,
"No, you certainly can't" - not knowing
that they were to be his last words.
Then suddenly, as Kennedy waved,
there was a popping noise.
Most in the crowd thought it was
fireworks, or a car backfiring, and
continued waving, and taking photographs.
But there was another shot, and the
President reached up, holding his neck.
There was confusion for a moment,
and some in the crowd dropped
to the floor, taking cover.
Excitement turned to panic, and
people began running for safety.
Then, a third shot hit Kennedy
directly in the head, rocked his
body backwards and sent blood and
brain flying across the limousine.
Instinctively, Jackie Kennedy jumped
up and leaned over the back of
the limousine, trying to retrieve
the back of her husband’s skull.
The limousine tore off,  accelerated
very quickly, in the direction of
the underpass towards the freeway.
In a panic, the crowd began to run for
cover, and others turned, looking up.
Police raced up the grassy
knoll, looking for the shooter.
Witnesses pointed in the direction
they thought the shots had come from.
Looking up, they saw a tall
red-brick building: the
Texas School Book Depository.
Just half an hour later,
at 1:00pm, John F.
Kennedy was pronounced dead at
the Parkland Memorial Hospital.
The President was dead - but
who had pulled the trigger?
To understand who, and more
importantly why, we need to go back
almost exactly 24 years, to the 18th
of October, 1939, in New Orleans.
This was the date that a lady called
Marguerite Frances Claverie gave
birth to a son, Lee Harvey Oswald.
His father, Robert, died two months
before Lee was born, so the young boy
grew up without a father and didn’t
exactly have the easiest of upbringings.
His mother became an alcoholic,
and the family moved around a lot.
In fact, it's believed that by
the time he left school Oswald
had lived in 22 different places
and gone to 12 different schools.
Not an easy start, and this led to Oswald
skipping school, “truanting” the word is.
When Oswald began truanting, he was
seen by a psychiatrist at a juvenile
reform centre, who concluded that the
young boy had "personality pattern
disturbance with schizoid features
and passive-aggressive tendencies.”
The doctor went on: “Lee has to be
seen as an emotionally, quite disturbed
youngster who suffers under the impact
of really existing emotional isolation
and deprivation, lack of affection,
absence of family life and rejection by
a self-involved and conflicted mother.”
At age 12, Oswald threatened
a family member with a knife.
And by October of 1956, when
he was 17, he dropped out of
high school and joined the U.S.
Marines.
But he didn’t really take to, or enjoy
his time there, and was described by
a fellow Marine as “lonely, aloof,
and always hating the outfit.”
Importantly, for our story,
and for American history, he
qualified as a marksman, meaning
someone trained to shoot a gun.
Despite being a US Marine, and a
soldier during the Cold War, the battle
between Capitalism and Socialism,
Oswald developed left-wing views, and
began voicing pro-Soviet sentiment.
In fact, he was known among his
fellow Marines as “Osvaldovich”, in
reference to his left-wing beliefs.
One Marine said of Oswald that “If you
complained about, ‘Oh, we’ve got to go on
a march this morning’ or ‘oh, we’ve got
to do this this morning,’ scrub barracks
or whatever we had to do… he would say
that that was the capitalist form of
government making us do these things.
Karl Marx and his form of
government would alleviate that.”
As strange as a communist US Marine
might sound, perhaps this was Oswald
- the neglected and isolated child,
remember - it was him searching for
the belonging he hadn’t found in
family life, school or the Marines.
In his diary, Oswald admitted as
much, writing “I was looking for
a key to my environment, and then
I discovered socialist literature”
He even taught himself some basic
Russian from a grammar book, something
that would come in handy later on.
On the 11th of September, 1959, not even
3 years after enlisting, he was discharged
from the Marines, he left the army.
Just nine days later, at the height of
the Cold War, Oswald took his pro-Soviet
studying to the next level and boarded
a boat from New Orleans to France.
From there he went to Southampton,
in England, then flew to Helsinki,
was issued a Soviet visa a few
days later, then crossed the border
into the Soviet Union and arrived
in Moscow on the 16th of October.
But Oswald had a problem - a big one.
His visa was only valid for
a week, so what did he do?
He immediately tried to get
Soviet citizenship, to become
a citizen of the Soviet Union.
He figured that he would be
welcomed with open arms, he would be
welcomed into this communist utopia.
But unfortunately for Oswald,
things went somewhat differently.
According to his personal diary, when
Oswald  met with a Russian visa official
and asked to become a citizen of the
‘Great Soviet Union’, in his words, he
was told that the ‘USSR is only great in
literature’ and that he should go home.
Oswald was crushed, he was devastated.
He had spent years learning about
communist theory and Soviet society, he
had tried to learn Russian, even saved
up his wages from the Marines to make
the long journey across the Iron Curtain
only to be rejected once he arrived.
As he wrote in his diary, “my
fondest dreams are shattered
because of a petty official.”
Distraught, three days after
his 20th birthday, and less than
a week after arriving in the
Soviet Union, Oswald attempted
suicide, he tried to kill himself.
According to his diary,
his plan was: “ End it.
Soak wrist in cold water to numb the pain.
Then slash my left wrist.”
He survived, and after a stint, a short
period, in hospital, he was released
and allowed to stay in the USSR because
the Soviet authorities feared he
would cause an international incident
if he tried to kill himself again.
They sent him to Minsk, now the
capital of Belarus, where he was
given work at a radio and TV factory
and an apartment in the city centre.
He enjoyed a relatively comfortable
standard of living compared to
working-class Soviet standards, but
he was kept under strict surveillance
by the intelligence services.
Strangely enough, Stanislau Shushkevich,
the man who would go on to become
Belarus’ first post-Soviet head of
state, also worked at the same factory
as Oswald and was even assigned
to help him improve his Russian.
In Minsk, Oswald met a lady called
Marina Nikolayevna Prusakova, and
they married on April 30th of 1961.
According to a man called Peter
Savodnik, who wrote a book about
Oswald’s time in Minsk, Oswald
defection was as psychological as
it was ideological, or political.
Though Oswald did want to be in the
USSR and do his part for communism,
Savodnik argues that “he went
there because he didn't fit in
anywhere else, he was a desperate
and lonely young man who believed
that in Russia he would be rescued."
Oswald was, it seems, still
looking, yearning for somewhere
he could feel at home.
But Soviet life began to wear on the young
man, and in February of 1962, he wrote
to the U.S Embassy to report that the
Soviet authorities were holding him and
his wife against their will, and that he
wanted to return to the United States.
Because he had never formally renounced
his American citizenship, in June of
1962, Oswald was given a temporary
US passport, allowed to return to his
homeland and arrived in New York with his
Soviet wife and three-month old daughter.
The family quickly moved to Dallas,
in Texas, and Oswald travelled
to New Orleans to look for work.
Struggling to hold a job down, he
began engaging in political activity,
claiming that he was a representative
of a pro-Castro organisation called
the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
The New York headquarters of this
organisation, however, denied
having any knowledge of him.
One can only imagine what must have been
going on in his head at the time, but
we do know for sure what he did next.
In March of 1963, less than a year after
returning home, back to the United States,
he used an alias, or fake name, and
bought two guns: a rifle, and a revolver.
Now, many people aren’t
aware of this next part.
But Oswald actually had a test run, a
practice, to try out his new weapon.
Around a month after buying his rifle,
and just months before he would shoot
Kennedy, Oswald took his rifle to the home
of an American general, a man called Major
General Edwin Walker, and shot through
a window as Walker sat at his desk.
Walker, who was a very vocal
anti-communist voice in American
society, escaped without any injuries.
The assailant was never caught, and
it was only after Oswald's death that
it was revealed to have been him.
When he returned to New Orleans, he
took part in a local radio debate and
proudly declared himself a Marxist,
and in August of 1963 he was arrested
for distributing pro-Castro propaganda.
Strangely enough, he was still given a
full foreign travel passport – despite
the fact that he was known to the
American authorities and had been
interrogated by the F.B.I and C.I.A
when he returned from the USSR.
Using this new passport, Oswald
travelled to Mexico for a few weeks,
where he visited the Soviet and Cuban
embassies and tried to arrange to
travel to the Soviet Union via Cuba.
When he returned to the U.S, he was
still looking for work, that was, until
a Russian-speaking friend who had been
helping Oswald’s wife mentioned that
a neighbour knew of a job opportunity
- at a book depository in Dallas.
Little did the neighbour know that
their kind offer had unknowingly set
the scene for the assassination of
the President of the United States.
In Dallas, Oswald rented a single
room under the name O H Lee and began
working at the book depository, or
warehouse, only returning to see his
family in the suburbs on weekends.
According to the owner of the
boarding house where he stayed during
the week, Oswald didn’t interact
with many of the other residents,
only worked and made phone calls.
“They were local phone calls and he
always made them in a foreign language."
they said.
"I think it was German, or maybe Russian.
He was really considerate about it.
If other people were wanting
to phone he would wait.
He was just about as good a
tenant as we could wish to have.”
In November of 1963, it was announced
that President Kennedy would be
visiting Dallas, and several local
newspapers published the route that the
President’s motorcade would be taking.
It passed, of course, the Texas School
Book Depository - Oswald’s place of work.
On the night of Thursday the 21st, Oswald
unexpectedly returned to his family home
and spent the night - something that
he only ever really did at weekends.
The next morning, on Friday the 22nd,
Oswald’s 19-year-old neighbour, Wesley
Frazier, gave him a lift to work.
Frazier noticed that Oswald was
carrying a long, heavy parcel.
It was, Oswald told him, “just
some window blinds which I’m
taking downtown to get fixed.”
At 12:30pm that afternoon, on the 22nd of
November, Oswald set up his rifle on the
sixth floor of the depository building.
He waited for the motorcade to
pass, and fired three shots that
killed President Kennedy as his
car passed through Dealey Plaza.
Well, as we will discuss in the next
episode, that’s the official story.
As the President’s car sped away and
the crowd down in the plaza tried
to make sense of what was going on,
Oswald fled the scene and took a bus.
But as there was such a buzz of
police activity in Dealey Plaza, the
city quickly filled with traffic.
Oswald got out and took a taxi back to
his boarding house, sitting in the front
seat as was common in the Soviet Union.
The driver, who hadn’t yet heard the
news of the President’s assassination,
asked Oswald what all the police
sirens were for, not knowing that
he was sitting next to the assassin.
Oswald said nothing, and stayed
silent for the entire journey.
The driver would later say that he
thought Oswald was “a wino two days
off the bottle,” meaning an alcoholic
experiencing withdrawal symptoms.
He dropped him off a few minutes from the
boarding house, and after checking the
coast was clear, after checking the police
weren’t following him, Oswald went inside.
The only person there was a housekeeper,
Earlene Roberts, who was sitting
watching the television, having
heard the news of the President’s
assassination just minutes before.
Around 1pm Oswald, or “Mr.
Lee” as he was known to the other
residents, arrived and rushed across
the living-room into his bedroom.
“You’re in a hurry, aren’t you?” Roberts
asked him, but Oswald did not respond.
He left again moments later in a
different jacket, a pistol stuffed
into the waistband of his trousers.
Back at the Texas Book Depository, where
police officers were now searching,
certain that that was where the shots
had come from, the supervisor told police
that only one man was
missing: Lee Harvey Oswald.
At 1.15pm Oswald was stopped by a
Dallas police patrolman named J.D
Tippit, who thought he matched the
suspect’s description already being
passed around on the police radio.
Oswald shot and killed Tippit with
his revolver, and around half an
hour later, at 1.45pm, Oswald was
captured in the Texas Theatre.
By 7pm, less than 7 hours after he had
pulled the trigger, he had been formally
charged with the murder of President
Kennedy, and by then news of Kennedy’s
assassination had spread around the world.
Oswald, the outcast Marine who had
defected to the Soviet Union, had shot
dead the President of the United States.
So why did he do it?
According to one of Oswald’s
friends, Paul Gregory, he didn’t
even particularly dislike Kennedy.
In fact, the family kept a copy of
Time Magazine with Kennedy on the
front cover on display in their home.
Priscilla McMillan, a friend of Oswald’s
wife, even said that “Lee liked Kennedy.”
“He liked him in civil rights.
He disliked him for the Bay of
Pigs invasion of Cuba,” she said.
“But insofar as he spoke about
Kennedy, it was to praise him.”
As we’ll see in the next episode,
there are many, many different
theories as to why - and indeed
how - Oswald killed Kennedy.
But if we accept the official version
of events for a moment, perhaps Oswald,
despite actually quite admiring Kennedy
on a personal level, decided that
killing him was the best way to send
a political, or ideological message.
With Cold War tensions at their peak in
1963, maybe Oswald thought that killing
the symbol of American power - the
president - would please the Soviet
Union and that he would, finally, find
the place he belonged, the place he
had been searching for his entire life.
But as you probably know, this is not the
end of the story of Lee Harvey Oswald.
On the morning of the 24th, less than
48 hours after shooting JFK,  Oswald was
being led through the underground car
park of the Dallas police station to be
transferred to an interrogation office.
The small space was filled with a
crowd of reporters and police officers,
and there was very little security.
Nonetheless, Oswald was taken through
the crowd with two officers by his side.
James Leavelle, one of the Dallas police
officers who was at his side, later said,
“I put the handcuffs on him, and in the
process of doing that, I more in jest kind
of said, ‘Lee, if anybody shoots at you,
I hope they’re as good a shot as you are.”
Oswald, he said, “kind of laughed and he
said, ‘Oh, you’re being melodramatic,’
or something to that effect.
‘Nobody’s going to shoot at me.'”
Anyway, as Oswald emerged from the
station, a man named Jack Ruby, a
nightclub owner with ties to the
Chicago underworld, approached
Oswald and shot him in the stomach.
Everyone stood around in
shock for a second, as Oswald
screamed and fell to the floor.
He was taken to Parkland Memorial
hospital - the same hospital where
Kennedy died just two days before.
At 1.07pm, Oswald was pronounced dead.
As the incident was being broadcast
on television, millions of Americans
watched Oswald’s assasination live.
As you may know, I’ve just given
you the official version of events.
That Lee Harvey Oswald acted
alone was the final conclusion of
the Warren Commission - the body set
up to investigate the assassination.
Yet the assassination of John F.
Kennedy [and Oswald’s role in
it] is perhaps the most popular
conspiracy theory of all time.
It is, you could say, the mother of
all conspiracy theories - the one
that even the most rational, trusting
people believe has some truth to it.
For many people, something about
that day in 1963 smelled fishy,
it just wasn’t quite right.
Whether it be Oswald’s time in the
Soviet Union, and conspiracies that
he was a Soviet hitman sent to strike
a blow in the Cold War, or Jack
Ruby’s mafia connections - indeed,
Kennedy’s supposed mafia connections.
Or even the fact that he was walked
through an open car park with minimal
security just days after assassinating
the President of the United States.
Many Americans don’t believe the Warren
Commission’s findings; that a lone gunman,
one man alone, could kill the President.
A Gallup poll from March of 2001
found that 81 percent of Americans
believed there were other people
involved in Kennedy’s death.
Just 13 percent believed
that Oswald acted alone.
Indeed, the focus of the next episode,
a follow-up to this one, will be some
of the most widely-believed conspiracy
theories about what really happened
on that fateful November afternoon.
But it is important to remember that
Oswald was, at the very least, involved.
He was a US Marine who defected
to the Soviet Union, afterall.
A trained marksman who hated American
capitalism and everything it represented.
A man who, wherever he went in the
world, never seemed to quite fit in
and lived a mysterious life, travelling
around and interacting with political
radicals, Soviet and Cuban spies.
Some say he was personally instructed to
kill Kennedy by the leader of the Soviet
Union, others say Oswald was the gunman
in the biggest mob killing of all time.
There are few who debate that Lee Harvey
Oswald pulled the trigger, but to the
question of “why”, and “with whose
help?”, well that is a question that seems
like it might never truly be solved.
OK then, that is it for today’s
episode on Lee Harvey Oswald - the
man who killed the president.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about Lee
Harvey Oswald, or you didn’t know
much about his backstory at all, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Why do you think Lee Harvey
Oswald killed John F.
Kennedy?
Do you believe he was
the only person involved?
How might the world have been
different if the bullets had missed?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.